===== Lecture 5B | pages 63-68 =====

10      Lecture5B
CS294-277 Fall 2024                                                                     Lecturer: Jitendra Malik
October 7, 2024                                                                Scribe: Renhao Wang, Dasheng Bi

Lecture 5B: Computational neuroscience perspective on prediction and control
                                                     Abstract
          We begin by continuing the previous lecture with a discussion on motion planning for robots. We
       describe classical methods (both analytic and probabilistic) for constructing roadmaps. We observe the
       limitations of these classical approaches, which assume that the environment is perfectly described. We
       then describe theories from neuroscience of motor control that abandon this assumption (internal inverse
       model, feedforward-feedback).


10.1      Motion Planning
The problem of motion planning in robotics is as follows: given a robot with some embodiment in a known
environment in some start configuration, find a path to reach a desired goal position, that avoids collisions
with obstacles in the environment. Below are a few examples of this problem.

   • Consider a mobile robot moving around on the floor, avoiding collisions with tables and chairs.

   • Consider an arm moving in space (e.g., to pick up a cup). No part of the arm (both the end effector
     and its joints) should collide with objects in the environment.

We will first define a few key terms, building up to the idea of a “roadmap” and show that they solve the
motion planning problem. Then, we describe probabilistic implementations that solve motion planning when
analytic solutions are intractable or undesirable.

10.2      Definitions




                                 Figure 30: Basic definitions in motion planning.

As seen in Figure 30 (left), we begin by examining a simple two-link robot, parameterized by joint θ1 and
joint θ2 . Suppose we have a set of obstacles A, B and C, as in Figure 30 (middle), and a given initial position
for the two links. From this start position, one can imagine that in order to reach the specified end position,


                                                         63
the arm needs to retract, before moving upwards. How can we formalize this problem so that such a motion
trajectory can be parameterized?
We define a configuration space, or C-space, for the robot, which are feasible joint angles in the set θ1 xθ2 ,
as visualized in Figure 30 (right). Then, obstacles can be translated into C-space by describing the set of
joint angles that result in collisions with them. Then obstacle avoidance is reduced to finding a path in this
space that avoids any of the shaded regions represented.




                 Figure 31: Growing C-space to practically deal with robot morphologies.

One detail is that robots are not point masses; the circular mobile robot described in Figure 31 above has
some diameter. The two-link robot arm also has a width. To deal with this practical consideration, we could
simply “expand” the robot such that every point along its body is now a disk with some radius r. More
commonly, a complementary approach is taken: we can “grow” each obstacle in the environment by some r
that is appropriate to the size of the robot, so that any position outside the expanded obstacles is considered
free space. This reduces the problem to the point mass robot case. In particular, in Figure 31 above, we note
that the two obstacles intersect after being expanded appropriately—this corresponds to the gap between the
two objects not being wide enough for the robot to pass.

10.3    Roadmaps and Motion Planning
Given some C-space, we can describe the free space Cfree with a 1D roadmap R. In particular, consider the
following two criteria:

   • Reachability: ∀q ∈ Cfree , ∃q ′ ∈ R such that a trivial free path (i.e., a straight line) exists between q
     and q ′ .

   • Connectivity: For each connected component in Cfree , there is one connected component in R.

Then, motion planning can be reduced to finding a roadmap, paths from start and goal positions to R, and a
path on R that connects the corresponding positions. An analytical theory of roadmaps was described by
Canny (1988) in his PhD thesis. This is a hard problem in general, though, and requires “semialgebraic sets”
and the theory of algebraic geometry to solve (and is not in the scope of this class).




                                                      64
                                      Figure 32: Probabilistic roadmap.


10.4     Probabilistic Roadmaps
An alternative technique developed by Kavraki et al. (1996a) provides an efficient (approximate) algorithm
based on probabilistic sampling. Specifically, can construct a probabilistic roadmap (PRM) by the following
steps (see Figure 32:
   • Sample points randomly from Cfree , adding them to R.
   • For each point in R, consider its k nearest neighbors in R, and add corresponding edges if there exists
     straight line paths between the point and its neighbors.
We observe that (approximate) motion planning is reduced to a graph traversal problem on the PRM (namely,
finding the shortest path between the closest nodes on the PRM to the start and end points). Moreover, the
PRM graph can be precomputed, and at inference time we only need to find nearest nodes to our start and
end points, and traverse the graph (e.g., with Dijkstra’s), which makes this approach have good amortized
runtime. Note that other efficient algorithms (e.g., rapidly-exploring random trees) have been developed for
use cases where do not need to reuse the roadmap.

10.5     Paths vs. Trajectories
Finally, we comment on the difference between paths and trajectories. Succinctly:
   • Path: The sequence of positions on a curve θ(s), where s is the arc length. This is the configuration as
     a function of space only.
   • Trajectory: The sequence of points in a path over time, θ(t).
   • Time scaling: The arc length as a function of time, s(t).
Trajectories contain more information: often, we not only want to know the (x, y) positions, but we also want
to correspond each (x, y) position to some specific time t. This allows us to fully describe a planned motion.
It is also important to perform the time scaling in a sufficiently “smooth” manner, since we wish to accelerate
and decelerate smoothly. Suppose that one wants to reach and pick up an object. One starts from stationarity,
smoothly accelerates to some desired velocity towards the object, before deaccelerating to some specified
grasp pose and lifting the object. This process is visualized in the time-scaled s(t) curve depicted in Figure 33.


                                                       65
                          Figure 33: Time-scaling example yielding an “S-curve.”


10.6    Critiques from Vision
While classical motion planning is a largely solved problem, the formulations (from the 1980s and 1990s)
largely rest on a critical assumption: that the environment is perfectly characterized; in particular, we have
global knowledge of the obstacles. However, in reality, knowledge about such obstacles needs to be derived
from some (noisy) perception system, especially for environments we have no a priori knowledge about, and
real perception and action are often decoupled. In practice, we often must resort to local algorithms and
perception combined with backtracking to find solutions.

10.7    Introduction - Neuroscience and Motor Control
In this section, we provide a brief overview of important ideas from computational neuroscience for motor
control. We look at the work of Nikolai Bernstein on degrees of freedom, and also the work of Mitsuo Kawato
on the internal model hypothesis.

10.8    Nikolai Bernstein and the DoF Problem
Early work in developmental perspectives on control was dominated by more simplistic reflex models (e.g.,
Pavlov). We can view such work as a simple feedback control to reinforcement learning (e.g., a P-controller).
Bernstein argued against such models. In particular, he recognized and formulated the DoF problem, which
essentially is the observation that reinforcement learning is hard when the dimensionality of the system is
high, since there is an exponentially large state space. In particular, Bernstein observed that human motion
is composed by simultaneous control of many joints, which results in a C-space with high DoF. This is
exemplified by the fact that we can realize the same trajectory with vastly different joint movements. For
example, one can sign one’s name with a pen and paper, on a large whiteboard, or in the sand with one’s
toes. These motions require completely different control mechanisms for completely different sets of joints,
yet are all semantically similar and should contain similar representations somewhere in the brain.
This begs the question of what the representations that enable such an approach to control are. How can we
learn systems that capture this approach? Bernstein argued for a gradual approach to the learning problem,
where initially certain DoFs are freezer, and more and more joints are used over time as learning progresses.
We note that this is also present in the vision literature, as a coarse-to-fine hierarchy.

10.9    Mitsuo Kawato and the Internal Model Hypothesis
The internal model hypothesis, which essentially suggests that we use a forward simulation for planning,
originated in the control theory literature. It was proposed in biological contexts by Ito (1972), Kawato
(1999), and Jordan and Rumelhart (1992).



                                                     66
Figure 34: Kawato’s internal model hypothesis (bottom) vs. simple feedback control (above).”




                 Figure 35: Sensory signatures characterizing motor events.




                                            67
The popularity of the internal model hypothesis stems from a crucial observation: that a feedback controller
(e.g., a PID controller) is simply too slow a model for human motor control (c.f. Figure 34 (top)). Notably, a
feedback system involving vision would be even slower, with a 150 ms delay. This is because feedback in
the human brain needs multiple synapses to realize. Therefore, what is a more reasonable model of human
computation when it comes to motor planning and control?
Kawato (1999) provides one such answer via the internal model hypothesis. The idea is that human control is
a combination of both feedforward and feedback systems. In particular, a good (and fast) feedforward model
means that we have a good sense of what effects our actions will have on us in relation to the environment,
and that we can quickly predict what will happen using an efferent copy of the motor command that is
generated (cf. Figure 35 (top)). Complementing this is a good feedback, or inverse model, that allows us to
generate a sensible plan and corresponding motor signals (cf. Figure 35 (bottom)), which then only needs
to be modified on-the-fly with small adjustments. These adjustments can be facilitated easily by the faster
feedforward system (c.f. Figure 34 (right)).
Finally, we consider an important consequence of this hypothesis, where actions can be characterized by
different stages. Note that it is not feasible to have continuous feedback control during each of the stages due
to the high latency. However, each stage’s end is represented by events that contain “signatures” as sensory
observations in various modalities (auditory, vision, tactile). Crucially, an internal feedforward model allows
us to predict these signatures, and an easily implemented comparison mechanism between the predictions
and the actual sensory observations could provide rapid feedback for actions in the next stage. Indeed, this
theory seems like common sense, but consider how many of our current robot systems use this idea. This is
the problem that we have to solve.




                                                      68

