===== Lecture 10A | pages 103-107 =====

18      Lecture10A
booktabs tcolorbox
CS294-277 Fall 2024                                                                       Lecturer: Jitendra Malik
September 9, 2024                                                          Scribe: Kyle Stachowicz, Yarden Goraly

                         Lecture 10A: Learning Policies for Navigation
                                                       Abstract
           This lecture will summarize methods for robot navigation, starting from how this problem has been
       solved using classical methods, and then discussing various learning approaches. Visual navigation involves
       mapping an environment as well as performing collision-free navigation to find some goal, usually specified
       either geometrically (location), visually (as an image of the target location), or semantically (through
       language or object categories).


18.1      Introduction and Problem Statement
A common problem in robotics is navigation: deploying a robot equipped with a first-person camera into
a novel environment and assigning it a navigation-based goal. These goals can be specified in two ways:
geometrically, such as directing the robot to a specific (x, y) coordinate, or semantically, like instructing it to
“go to the kitchen”. For example, a robot might be placed in an unfamiliar AirBnB and tasked with locating
a plant. In this case, the robot would have to explore the environment without colliding with obstacles until
it finds something that looks like a plant, then navigate towards the detected object. In many cases, it may
also be possible to make use of semantic priors about the world - for example, exploiting knowledge of which
rooms of a house might be most likely to contain a plant.

18.2      General Approaches to Navigation
There are three (main) approaches to tackling the navigation problem: classical approaches, end-to-end
learning, and modular systems incorporating both learned and classical components in a pipeline with
well-defined responsibilities and boundaries.

18.3      Classical
The classical approach breaks the navigation problem down into two stages:

   • Stage 1: Perception and Mapping. Build a geometric map (either offline or online) using mapping
     or SLAM based on visual or geometric observations. Example: Hartley and Zisserman (2004).

   • Stage 2: Goal-directed exploration. If the destination is a known location in the map, we can just
     use classical planning methods to plan a path to the goal. If the destination is not already available in
     the map, we can use some sort of heuristic exploration until we find the target. Example: Kavraki et al.
     (1996b).

Classical approaches take advantage of strong priors (geometry), but do not have the benefit of learning from
data. As a result, semantic knowledge and reasoning (which objects are likely to be in which areas) is difficult
to inject into classical methods in a scalable way.
Takeaway: Classical approaches both do too much (model and reconstruct the entire world!!) and too little
(no semantic understanding of the world). They are unable to understand context clues, so if the goal is
specified semantically the best they can do is randomly explore. If we want to capture statistical relationships,
we need to use statistical techniques!




                                                          103
Figure 75: Approaches to robot learning (for navigation, but also in general) can be broken down into three
categories: classical, end-to-end, and modular.


18.4     End-to-End Learning
End-to-end approaches model the robot’s actions entirely via a single images-to-actions neural network Levine
et al. (2016). Typical approaches might model the policy as a single recurrent model or as a transformer,
which can be trained either via RL or with imitation.

Imitation learning trains the model to directly imitate some expert. In simulation, this strategy can be
appealing at surface level since we often have some privileged world knowledge (like a perfect planner) that
can be used to get expert trajectories. However, care must be taken to make sure the expert policy’s actions
have the same level of world knowledge as the model (ground-truth knowledge turns the problem from a
POMDP into an easier MDP, which means you’ll never get exploration behavior!).

Reinforcement learning essentially trains the policy to reach goals through trial and error. Because
the initial policy is random and useful behavior must be built up from scratch by exploring and correctly
performing credit assignment to high-value actions, this approach can require a huge amount of episodes to
work successfully. This typically necessitates learning in simulation, where data is plentiful, meaning that the
sim-to-real gap must be overcome.

Both of these approaches tend to require large amounts of data (e.g. 200 million frames of reinforce-
ment learning Ramrakhya et al. (2022)), which typically has to be collected via sim-to-real as real-world data
is prohibitively expensive. However, sim-to-real transfer of visual (RGB) observations suffers from a large
domain gap, and so real-world performance is typically poor.

Editor’s note: some more recent work has achieved much more successful end-to-end policies trained in
simulation and deployed in the real world: https: // poliformer. allen. ai/ .

18.5     Modular
Modular approaches for navigation assign tasks into two separate modules Chaplot et al. (2020):

  1. Build up a semantic map based on previous experience and semantic information (e.g., semantic
     segmentation). This part can use different underlying models or systmes during training and at
     inference (for example, ground-truth semantic segmentation labels during training and outputs from an
     off-the-shelf segmentation model during inference).

  2. Perform goal-oriented exploration based on the semantic map. This part is typically learned via RL in


                                                      104
Figure 76: Simulators commonly used for robotic navigation tend to have high sim-to-real gap, especially in
terms of their visual RGB observations.


       simulation, consuming the outputs of the semantic mapping module.

Modular approaches avoid the need to learn a perception stack in simulation, taking advantage of off-the-shelf
object detection and segmentation models trained entirely from real-world data. They are able to achieve
high performance if the simulation environment is semantically similar (but not necessarily perfectly visually
similar) to downstream testing environments.

18.6     Comparisons
   • While all methods perform similarly in simulation environments, only modular and classical approaches
     transfer effectively to the real world. End-to-end approaches fail due to the large sim-to-real gap.

   • Sim-to-real: Able to transfer some things well, but perception is not one of them! The sim-to-real gap
     in RGB observations is extremely large.

   • Classical methods perform mostly frontier exploration, where the next unexplored region on the
     map is explored. This does not require (nor benefit from) learning.

   • Learning-based approaches (both end-to-end and modular) can benefit from semantic exploration,
     involving knowledge from pretraining, such as:

           “The couch will likely be in the living room and is unlikely to be found in the bathroom.”


                        Method                         Sim                Real
                                                 Success     SPL    Success      SPL
                        Modular Learning           0.81      0.64     0.90       0.64
                        Classical                  0.78      0.42     0.80       0.42
                        End-to-End Learning        0.77      0.39     0.23       0.39

Table 1: Comparing classical, end-to-end, and modular approaches to navigation. End-to-end approaches
trained in simulation experience catastrophic collapse in performance when transfered to the real world due
to large domain gap between simulated RGB images and real images.




                                                     105
Figure 77: GOAT architecture. GOAT uses a modular pipeline where a set of standard off-the-shelf image
processing models (segmentation, depth, etc.) are used to build a geometric semantic map of the world and
semantic information about objects contained in it. These modules also record object instances, which can
then be used by a high-level policy to generate high-level goals for navigation towards a particular object
instance specified by language or image descriptions. Finally, a local policy interprets the high-level goal and
performs collision-free local navigation.


18.7     Takeaways
[colback=gray!10, colframe=gray!80, title=Takeaway] Vision systems should be trained on real-world
data. At least with current simulators, visual fidelity is not yet high enough to get direct sim-to-real transfer
of RGB images. [colback=gray!10, colframe=gray!80, title=Takeaway] The policy itself (when trained
on modular outputs of the vision system) can be trained in simulation. Use of large-scale simulation
is crucial to get enough data to effectively train a neural network policy to perform history-conditioned
navigation.

18.8     Case Study: GOAT (GO to Any Thing)
Paper: Chang et al. (2023)
Recipe: Follow the modular pattern. In addition to semantic category information (projected into a geometric
map by constructing a semantic point cloud ), also keep track of viewpoints of potential target objects to
allow differentiation between instances. This means that we can distinguish between specific instances of
objects (rather than just broad closed-world object categories), which enables:

   • Specifying goals via granular language descriptions (e.g., “the red fuzzy bear”) rather than just specifying
     via a coarse category (“bear”).

   • Lifelong semantic memory allows building up the map continually over time, meaning you can navigate
     to any previously seen instance without additional exploration, even if that instance was not the original
     target present during exploration. This has the effect of allowing the robot to continually adapt to a
     downstream environment as it stores additional semantic world knowledge in its memory (Fig.78).

   • Updating the semantic map incrementally when an object moves (as object instances can now be
     uniquely identified by alternative viewpoints of the same object). As a special case, this enables social
     navigation by treating humans as dynamic obstacles.


                                                      106
Figure 78: Performance of GOAT navigation model increases with multiple new goals specified sequentially
in a (previously unseen) environment.


18.9    Conclusion
This lecture discussed the current state-of-the-art for learned robot navigation policies. We discussed three
high-level approaches to the navigation problem: classical, end-to-end, and modular pipelines composed
of learned components, and explored the pros and cons of each. We also took a deeper dive with GOAT,
a particular instantiation of the modular approach that is able to track fine-grained object instances and
successfully navigate to arbitrarily specific instance descriptions using langauge or instance images.




                                                    107

