===== Lecture 4A | pages 42-47 =====

7     Lecture4A
CS294-277 Fall 2024                                                                    Lecturer: Jitendra Malik
September 30, 2024                                                       Scribe: Vongani Maluleke, Dantong Niu
                                    Lecture 4A: Vision in Action
                                                     Abstract
          In this lecture, we explore how we use vision to guide our actions to manipulate and navigate the
      world. We look into how robots use vision to guide their actions and the role and importance of vision
      and proprioception during an action. We also analyze the importance role that the predictive signals play
      in action (eye movement, perception, etc.).


7.1    Introduction
How does our vision guide our actions? In this lecture, we will consider action and perception in an
evolutionary setting. The first stage is perception for guiding movement, followed by perception for guiding
manipulation and finally, the emergence of language.
How we use vision while guiding action comes from a naturalistic study, and the findings are as follows:
    • Vision is slow: this is true for both humans (animals) and robots, as the processing required for vision
      takes time. This can be observed in walking systems, manipulation systems, etc.

    • All the fast action happens through the use of proprioception, which is much faster: Communication of
      information about joint angles to the brain is very fast.

    • Vision is always used in conjunction with other senses: The most basic sense that we always have is
      proprioception, which is knowing about joint angles

7.2    Eye Movements
Another study by Land et al. (1999) tackles the question of how we use our eyes by studying what happens
when we perform a task like making a cup of tea. The subject in the study wore a camera on their head to
provide an ego-centric view of what they are doing, see Figure 25 (This is a first example of ego-exo video).
Land was performing gaze tracking, which important in human vision because the entire visual field is not
observed with the same resolution. The fovea tells us where the highest resolution is and the most important
parts of the scene are where your eyes will focus.
Side Note: Jitendra was part of a team that worked on a project called EGO4D. They collected 3000 hours
of ego-centric data, which is publicly available.




                           Figure 25: Illustration of the Study by Land et al. (1999)

Figure 26 gives you a picture of what are the steps involved in making a cup of tea and the fixation patterns
from the the ego-centric data. What should be noted is that there is a whole-body movement towards the


                                                         42
object of interest and visual fixation of the object. This is all possible because of proprioception as the vision
system locates the object and puts it in 3D space. We know the location of our joints and understand the
kinematics and inverse kinematics of the body. Therefore, the brain can command the correct sequence or
trajectory in joint angle space to pick up an object without needing the eyes to monitor the process.




  Figure 26: Fixation patterns from the ego-centric data collected during the study by Land et al. (1999)

Our proprioception provides a rough plan, and tactile sensing on the hand can guide the final steps. Vision is
not necessary. Hence, the delay in vision doesn’t impact the action while it’s being executed because the delay
is only in the initial planning step. However, this has limitations when something unexpected happens, like
dropping the cup, which will require using your vision again. This is called corrective behavior using vision.
The general principle is that we do not need vision to perform an action. This is equally true for walking and
manipulation. A demonstration in class was given by having a student walk towards a piece of paper with
eyes closed and stopping where the paper is. The student stopped close to the location of the paper which
shows that the visual system was used for the initial planning and not during the action of walking. This
shows that the motor system is intelligent enough to execute the action.
Eyes are directed towards where information that will be useful in the near future is likely to be found. There
has been many studies that has demonstrated this in various everyday tasks and specialized tasks like playing
music.
The gaze precedes and guides movements of the arm or leg. Similar eye movements guide tasks that do not
involve such movements. This is shown by observing different things in a painting called The Unexpected
Visitor Rapin, 1884. Generally, people anticipate when they will need certain information, and this is shown
by the patterns of the gazes in Figure 27.

7.3    Gaze and Foot Placement
A study of gaze and the control of foot placement when walking on natural terrain by Matthis et al. (2018)
found that walkers show distinct gaze strategies dependent on the demands of each terrain. However, the
walkers also adopted a constant look-ahead time across all terrains.
As a principle, proprioception should come first, and then you should bring in the vision for dealing with the
more difficult cases of long-range planning.

7.4    Perception and Locomotion
Animals are capable of precise and agile locomotion using vision. In robotics, perception plays a crucial role in
enhancing locomotion by enabling a robot to understand and interact with its environment effectively. From


                                                       43
  Figure 27: Fixation patterns from the ego-centric data collected during the study by Land et al. (1999)


a robot learning perspective, perception provides sensory input that is vital for making informed decisions,
improving adaptability, and optimizing performance in dynamic or unknown environments. Perception can
benefit locomotion in the following aspects:

   • Environmental Awareness and Mapping.Perception allows a robot to construct a representation
     (such as a 3D map) of its environment. Using sensors like cameras, LIDAR, or depth sensors, the robot
     can understand the layout of obstacles, surfaces, and other objects.

   • Obstacle Avoidance. For safe locomotion, robots need to identify and avoid obstacles. Perception
     systems provide the necessary sensory input, allowing robots to detect objects, estimate distances, and
     plan collision-free paths.

   • Terrain Adaptation. Perception allows robots to assess different types of terrains (smooth, rough,
     sloped) and adapt their locomotion strategies accordingly.

   • Goal-Oriented Navigation. Perception enables a robot to recognize objects or landmarks in the
     environment that can be used as goals for locomotion. Robots can use visual or sensory inputs to locate
     and move toward specific targets.

An example that vision largely enhances the locomotion is Agarwal et al. (2023). As shown in 28, the work
presents the first end-to-end locomotion system capable of traversing stairs, curbs, stepping stones, and gaps.
The work show this result on a medium-sized quadruped robot using a single front-facing depth camera. The
small size of the robot necessitates discovering specialized gait patterns not seen elsewhere. The egocentric
camera requires the policy to remember past information to estimate the terrain under its hind feet. The
work trained the policy in simulation. Training has two phases-first, it trained a policy using reinforcement
learning with a cheap-to-compute variant of depth image and then in phase 2 distill it into the final policy
that uses depth using supervised learning. The resulting policy transfers to the real world and is able to run
in real-time on the limited compute of the robot. It can traverse a large variety of terrain while being robust
to perturbations like pushes, slippery surfaces, and rocky terrain.




                                                      44
Figure 28: The robot can traverse a variety of challenging terrain in indoor and outdoor environments, urban
and natural settings during day and night using a single front-facing depth camera. The robot can traverse
curbs, stairs and moderately rocky terrain.


7.5    Prediction and Action
7.6    The prediction in goal-directed action
Prediction plays a fundamental role in goal-directed action in robotics, particularly in scenarios where robots
must interact with dynamic environments or achieve specific tasks efficiently. Prediction helps the robot
anticipate future states of itself, the environment, or other agents, which is essential for planning and executing
goal-directed actions. Here are some points for the importance of perception in goal-directed action:

   • Prediction allows humans and other animals to prepare for future interactions with their environment.
     This is important in our dynamically changing world that requires fast and accurate reactions to external
     events.

   • Knowing when and where an event is likely to occur allows us to plan eye, hand, and body movements
     that are suitable for the circumstances.

   • Predicting the sensory consequences of such movements helps to differentiate between self-produced
     and externally generated movements.

As shown in Figure 29, the interception of a target object can be realized by predict and adjust your movement
direction and speed based on the observation of the movement of the target object.

7.7    Predictive signals and eye movements
As mentioned above, the prediction plays important role in action. Especially, when the brain receives the
predictive signals, it will lead to further interactions between the human and environments. Here are some
important take-aways:




                                                        45
                      Figure 29: More ways in which interception could be controlled.


   • The ability to anticipate future events plays a critical role in many daily contexts. It is particularly
     evident and important in certain sports. In cricket, for example, skilled batsmen fixate the ball as it
     leaves the bowler’s hand and then quickly make a saccade to near where the ball will bounce, waiting
     for its image to come back onto the fovea ( Land and McLeod (2000)).

   • The brain must have combined the visual information that was available soon after the bowler released
     the ball with a learned model of the ball’s motion to predict the location of the bounce and how the
     ball will move after the bounce. Saccades sometimes land above a future bounce point ( Diaz et al.
     (2013)), possibly to facilitate tracking the ball after the bounce by directing gaze to where the ball will
     pass shortly after it bounces.

   • Expertise in sports may partly consist of being better at anticipating. Whereas novice baseball batters
     are usually unable to track the fastest balls with their gaze, elite batters rely on a combination of eye
     and head rotations to track a fastball ( Higuchi et al. (2018)). Elite batters can even track the ball up
     to the moment of bat-ball contact in cricket (Mann et al., 2013).

7.8    Efference copy
Efference copy is a mechanism that plays a crucial role in how the brain predicts and differentiates between
motion caused by moving objects and motion caused by eye movements. For example, when watching a
train pass by, if your eyes remain still, the image of the train moves across the retina while the background
remains stationary. However, if you follow the train with your eyes, the train’s image remains stable on the
retina, while the background appears to move. The brain needs to figure out whether this retinal motion
is due to the movement of the object or the movement of the eyes. In 1950, Von Holst and Mittelstaedt
proposed the idea of an “efference copy” to explain this process. When the brain sends a motor command to
the eye muscles to move, it simultaneously sends a copy of this command to the visual areas of the brain.
This efference copy helps the brain predict the expected sensory outcome, allowing it to correctly attribute
changes in the visual field to either eye movements or object motion.




                                                      46
7.9    predictive signals can change perception
The concept that predictive signals can change perception is rooted in how the brain anticipates sensory input
based on prior experiences, internal models, and context. Our perception is not merely a passive reflection of
sensory input; rather, it is actively shaped by predictions the brain generates about the world. This predictive
mechanism enables us to process information more efficiently and react faster to our environment.
One of the prime examples of predictive sensory attenuation is the phenomenon that we cannot tickle
ourselves. Humans experience a touch on their own body as less ticklish if they produce the tactile stimulation
themselves ( Blakemore et al. (1999)).

7.10     AI systems need to build “mental models”
Craik (1943) suggests that if an organism maintains an internal model of the external world and its own
possible actions, it can simulate various scenarios, anticipate future events, and make decisions based on past
experiences. This allows the organism to respond more effectively and safely to new challenges by predicting
outcomes and choosing the best course of action before situations fully arise. This internal modeling enhances
the organism’s ability to handle complex situations with greater competence.




                                                      47

