Vision and Action
    Jitendra Malik

Phylogeny of Intelligence
                                                        Cambrian Explosion
                                                        540 million years ago

                                                        Variety of life forms,
                                                        almost all phyla emerge

                                                        Animals that could
                                                        see and move

                                                        Gibson: we see in order to move and we move in order to see

                                                                    Modern humans, last 50 K years
Hominid evolution, last 5 million years

                                               Bipedalism
                                               Opposable thumb                         Language
                                               Tool use                                Abstract thinking
Anaxogaras: It is because of his being armed with                                      Symbolic behavior
hands that man is the most intelligent animal

Eye Movements while making a cup of tea
Land, Mennie and Rusted (1999)

This may be the first example of ego-exo video

Eyes are directed towards where information
that will be useful in the near future is likely
to be found
• This has been demonstrated for various everyday tasks such as
  making tea (Land, Mennie, & Rusted, 1999), making a sandwich
  (Hayhoe, Shrivastava, Mruczek, & Pelz, 2003), walking (Matthis,
  Yates, & Hayhoe, 2018) and driving (Land & Lee, 1994; Wilkie &
  Wann, 2003). It has also been demonstrated for more specialized
  activities such as reading the score when playing music (Furneaux &
  Land, 1999).
• In all these cases, gaze precedes and guides movements of the arm
  or leg. Similar eye movements guide tasks that do not involve such
  movements. For instance, when reading (Rayner, 1998), searching for
  an object (Eckstein, 2011), or identifying faces (Peterson &
  Eckstein, 2013), observers move their eyes to where they anticipate
  to find the most relevant information at each moment. In general,
  people anticipate when they will need certain information

Legged Locomotion in Challenging
    Terrains using Egocentric Vision
    CORL 2022

Ananye Agarwal*   Ashish Kumar*   Jitendra Malik †   Deepak Pathak†
    CMU           UC Berkeley     UC Berkeley          CMU

Prediction in goal-directed action
Fiehler et al
• Prediction allows humans and other animals to prepare for future
  interactions with their environment. This is important in our
  dynamically changing world that requires fast and accurate
  reactions to external events.
• Knowing when and where an event is likely to occur allows us to
  plan eye, hand, and body movements that are suitable for the
  circumstances.
• Predicting the sensory consequences of such movements helps to
  differentiate between self-produced and externally generated
  movements.

From: Prediction in goal-directed action
Journal of Vision. 2019;19(9):10. doi:10.1167/19.9.10

   Figure Legend:
     More ways in which interception could be controlled.

  Date of download: 3/17/2020            The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology Copyright © 2020. All rights reserved.

How predictive signals drive eye movements
when interacting with dynamic objects
• The ability to anticipate future events plays a critical role in many daily
  contexts. It is particularly evident and important in certain sports. In cricket,
  for example, skilled batsmen fixate the ball as it leaves the bowler's hand
  and then quickly make a saccade to near where the ball will bounce, waiting
  for its image to come back onto the fovea (Land & MacLeod, 2000).
• The brain must have combined the visual information that was available
  soon after the bowler released the ball with a learned model of the ball's
  motion to predict the location of the bounce and how the ball will move
  after the bounce. Saccades sometimes land above a future bounce point
  (Diaz et al., 2013; Hayhoe et al., 2012), possibly to facilitate tracking the ball
  after the bounce by directing gaze to where the ball will pass shortly after it
  bounces.
• Expertise in sports may partly consist of being better at anticipating.
  Whereas novice baseball batters are usually unable to track the fastest balls
  with their gaze, elite batters rely on a combination of eye and head rotations
  to track a fastball (Higuchi, Nagami, Nakata, & Kanosue, 2018). Elite batters
  can even track the ball up to the moment of bat-ball contact in cricket (Mann
  et al., 2013).

Efference copy as a form of prediction

• Imagine watching a train pass by. If you do not follow the train with
  your eyes, its image will sweep across the retina while the image of
  the context surrounding the train will not. If you do follow the train
  with your eyes, its image will be (more or less) stable on the retina,
  while the context's image will produce a motion sweep.
• How does the brain figure out when to attribute retinal motion to
  object motion and when to attribute it to movements of the eyes?
• Von Holst and Mittelstaedt (1950) proposed that when a motor
  command is sent to the muscles that move the eyes, a copy of the
  efferent signal is simultaneously sent to visual areas of the brain.

Predictive signals change perception

• One of the prime examples of predictive sensory attenuation is the
  phenomenon that we cannot tickle ourselves. Humans experience a
  touch on their own body as less ticklish if they produce the tactile
  stimulation themselves (Blakemore, Frith, & Wolpert, 1999).

AI systems need to build “mental models”
                  If the organism carries a `small-scale model’ of
                  external reality and of its own possible actions
                  within its head, it is able to try out various
                  alternatives, conclude which is the best of them,
                  react to future situations before they arise, utilize
                  the knowledge of past events in dealing with the
                  present and the future, and in every way to react
                  in a much fuller, safer, and more competent
                  manner to the emergencies which face it (Craik,
                  1943,Ch. 5, p.61)

Commonsense is not just facts, it is a collection of
models

Subthemes

• Predicting sensory changes in the world
• Predicting the consequences of one’s own actions
• Combining predictions of eye, arm and object movements.

The Development of Sensitivity of Kinetic, Binocular and Pictorial
Depth Information in Human Infants
Albert Yonas, Carl E. Granrud
Brain Mechanisms of Spatial Vision, pp. 113-145 (1985)

• A program of research is described that explores the development of
  sensitivity to three classes of spatial information in human infants. The
  research suggests that sensitivity to kinetic, binocular and pictorial depth
  information develops in a fixed sequence. Some sensitivity to kinetic
  information may be present at birth or soon thereafter; sensitivity to
  binocular information appears between three and five months; and
  sensitivity to static monocular information appears between five and 7
  months of age. These findings may direct research on the development of
  neural mechanisms that underlie the emergence of responsiveness to
  spatial information in human infants.

                                                                                 23
