===== Lecture 2B | pages 22-28 =====

4     Lecture2B
CS294-277 Fall 2024                                                                      Lecturer: Jitendra Malik
September 16, 2024                                                        Scribe: Max (Letian) Fu and Justin Kerr

        Lecture 2B: The Human Hand and Dexterous Object Manipulation
                                                       Abstract
          Resuming from the first half of the lecture, this part of the lecture first resumes the discussion on the
      screw theory and then discusses the human hand and various atomic manual actions.


4.1    Introduction to Screw Theory
Screw theory is a powerful mathematical framework that provides a unified way to describe rigid body
motions in 3D space. A fundamental result of screw theory states that any rigid body motion, which includes
both rotation and translation, can be expressed as a screw motion. A screw motion consists of a simultaneous
rotation about, and translation along, a specific axis in space, known as the screw axis. Importantly, this
axis need not be centered on the object itself.
    This concept was first explored by Giulio Mozzi in 1763 and later formalized and popularized by Michel
Chasles 1830. Mozzi demonstrated that every Euclidean motion of a rigid body can be described by a
rotation about a fixed axis combined with a translation along that axis. Chasles further expanded on this
idea, formalizing what is now known as Chasles’ Theorem, which states that any general Euclidean motion in
3D space can be represented as a screw motion.




Figure 12: Visual depiction of a screw. Note however that the axis need not align with the object being
described (need not pass through the literal screw as shown)



4.2    Definition of a Screw
A screw is formally defined by the following components:

    • Screw axis: A line in space about which the body rotates and along which it translates.

    • Pitch (h): The pitch of a screw is the ratio of translational displacement per unit of rotation (usually
      measured in radians). Specifically, it is the distance the body translates along the screw axis for one
      complete revolution (i.e., a 2π radian rotation).

    • Rotation angle (θ): The amount of rotation about the screw axis.

    • Translation (t): The amount of translation along the screw axis.


                                                           22
   In summary, a screw motion is parameterized by the axis of the screw, the rotation about this axis, and
the pitch that defines the coupled translational motion. The screw’s pitch is analogous to the "thread" of
a conventional mechanical screw, where a higher pitch corresponds to greater translation for each unit of
rotation.

4.3    Degrees of Freedom in Screw Theory
The motion of a rigid body in 3D space is described by six degrees of freedom (DoF), encompassing both
translation and rotation. Screw theory provides an intuitive decomposition of these degrees of freedom into
components related to screw motion.

4.4    Degrees of Freedom for a Line in 3D
To understand how a screw can represent a rigid body motion, we first need to analyze the degrees of freedom
of a line in 3D space, which serves as the screw axis.

   • A line in 3D can be described by two components:

        – Direction: The direction of the line can be specified by a unit vector v̂, which has two degrees of
          freedom (DoF) since its orientation is constrained to lie on the surface of a unit sphere.
        – Position: The position of the line can be specified by a point on the line, which is constrained
          to a plane orthogonal to v̂. Thus, it requires two more degrees of freedom, as the point can be
          translated in the orthogonal plane.

   Therefore, a line in 3D space has a total of four degrees of freedom (DoF).

4.5    Degrees of Freedom of a Screw
To fully describe a screw motion, we need to account for both the screw axis and the motion along this axis:

   • Pitch (1 DoF): The pitch of the screw determines the ratio of translation to rotation along the screw
     axis. This introduces one degree of freedom.

   • Line in Space (4 DoF): The screw axis, as previously discussed, has four degrees of freedom.

   • Rotation about the Axis (1 DoF): The amount of rotation about the screw axis is characterized by
     one additional degree of freedom.

    Thus, a screw motion is defined by a total of six degrees of freedom (1 for pitch, 4 for the line, and 1
for the rotation).

4.6    Equivalence of 3D Rigid Body Motion and Screw Motion
A rigid body in 3D can undergo any combination of rotation and translation. As previously noted, this can
always be represented as a screw motion, which consists of a simultaneous rotation and translation along a
screw axis.
    We now provide a brief intuitive argument for why this equivalence holds:




                                                     23
4.7    Translation Decomposition
Any translation of a rigid body can be decomposed into two components relative to the screw axis:

   1. Translation parallel to the screw axis: This component can be directly represented by the
      translational part of the screw motion.

   2. Translation orthogonal to the screw axis: This component can be expressed as a shift of the screw
      axis, accompanied by a rotation about the new axis. Hence, the screw axis can be adjusted accordingly
      to capture the combined effect of translation and rotation.

  Thus, every arbitrary translation and rotation of a rigid body can be transformed into an equivalent screw
motion.

4.8    2D Analog: Rotation and Translation
In two dimensions (2D), we can similarly represent any combination of rotation and translation as a single
equivalent rotation about a new point. This concept is closely related to the pole, which is the point that
remains invariant during the motion.
    Given a rotation matrix R and a translation vector t, the pole p is the point that satisfies the following
condition:
                                               Rp + t = p
Solving for p, we find:
                                                  p = (I − R)−1 t
If there is no rotation (i.e., R = I), the pole is at infinity, corresponding to a pure translation. If there is only
a rotation (with no translation), the pole corresponds to the center of rotation.

4.9    Twists
Any rigid body motion can be represented as a twist, which describes both the angular and spatial velocity of
the object’s motion.                                                                    "         #
                                                                                           R    0
   To transform a twist from one frame to another, you use the adjoint matrix: [AdT ] =             ∈ R6×6 .
                                                                                         [p]R R
   The matrix representation of this is a skew-symmetric matrix in the top left for angular velocity and a
3-vector column vector on the right for translational velocity.

4.10     Wrenches
The forceful analog to screws is called a wrench, which describes the 6-dimensional force and torque applied
to a rigid body. This is because it mimics the properties a person might apply by moving a wrench in their
hand to move or rotate a target. The dot product of a twist and a wrench is power, since this physically
corresponds to doing work over time (intuitively in the translation-only case, think of multiplying a force by
a velocity, the units are (force*distance/time), which is dimensionally (work/time) == power. One can also
change the viewing coordinate frame of a wrench by multiplying by the adjoint matrix above.

4.11     Universal Robot Description Format (URDF)
The Universal Robot Description Format (URDF) is an XML file format used to describe the kinematics,
inertial properties, and geometry of a tree-structured robot. It provides a standardized way to specify a
robot’s kinematic chain, including joint types, link geometries, and inertial properties. URDF files are widely
used in robotics software frameworks, especially in ROS (Robot Operating System), to enable simulation,


                                                         24
visualization, and control of robots. By encapsulating lots of relevant information about a robot’s physical
structure in a single file, URDFs help share robot models across different software tools and applications.

4.12     URDF Elements
4.12.1   The Joint Element (Kinematics)
The joint element describes the kinematic properties relating one link to another. For example, the relative
offsets of origin frames, and the type (prismatic or revolute). Example below:

<joint name="joint2" type="revolute">
    <parent link="link1"/>
    <child link="link2"/>
    <origin rpy="0 1.5708 0" xyz="0 0.5 0"/>
    <axis xyz="0 1 0"/>
    <limit lower="-3.0" upper="3.0"/>
</joint>

4.12.2   The Link Element (Inertial Properties)
The link element describes the inertial properties of a robot link such as moment of inertia and mass. For
example:

<link name="link2">
    <inertial>
        <origin rpy="0 0 0" xyz="0 0 0.5"/>
        <mass value="2.25"/>
        <inertia ixx="1.0" ixy="0" ixz="0"
                 iyy="2.0" iyz="0" izz="3.0"/>
    </inertial>
</link>

   These XML elements define the structure and properties of each component in the robot’s kinematic
chain.

4.13     Hands and Manipulation in Robotics
In this part of the lecture, we alternate between understanding both the engineering challenges of robot
manipulation and the human use of hands. A key goal is to develop robotic hands capable of performing the
wide range of tasks that human hands can perform. To illustrate human hand use, we begin by examining
datasets such as 100 Days of Hands (Shan et al. (2020)) and Something-Something (Goyal et al. (2017)),
which capture a variety of tool-based actions performed by humans using their hands.
   Goal: The eventual aim is for robots to replicate this level of dexterous manipulation, performing tasks
with the same agility and adaptability as human hands.
   To understand how to achieve this in robotics, we first analyze the anatomy and functionality of human
hands, which demonstrate unparalleled dexterity.

4.14     Common Atomic Manual Actions
To make robot hand dexterity tractable, we focus on atomic actions – actions that can be performed in
roughly one second. These manual actions focus primarily on object manipulation, though human hands



                                                    25
Figure 13: Example hand interaction datasets. (Top) 100 Days of Hands. (Bottom) Ego-4D




                                          26
are also used for communication and gestures. The hypothesis is that a small set of actions can capture the
majority of tasks performed by human hands.
    Common examples of atomic manual actions include:

Object Manipulation
   • Pouring:

        – Grasping the object.
        – As the liquid pours, the weight of the object shifts, requiring tactile and haptic feedback.
        – Vision may not be necessary to execute this task.

   • Stirring:

        – Can be performed without vision.

   • Cutting with a Knife:

        – Requires vision to properly guide the tool.
        – Tool use in robotics is deficient, often requiring specialized grippers for different tasks.

   • Inserting Objects:

        – Position control to reach the correct location.
        – Force control to ensure the object is inserted properly without damage.
        – Feedback and precision are crucial.

   • Screwing/Unscrewing:

        – Vision is required to locate and estimate the size of screws.

   • Writing:

        – Can be done blind, though vision improves precision.
        – From a control perspective, predictive control minimizes delays.

   • Wiping and Painting:

        – These tasks involve a combination of force and position control.

   • Hammering/Drilling/Scissor Use/Rolling Pin/Peeling:

        – Examples of tool use requiring complex coordination of forces and movements.

4.15     Challenges in Tool Use and Manipulation
In-hand Reorientation
Some tools, such as scissors, require reorienting objects within the hand, a skill that is challenging for robots.

Parallel Jaw Grippers vs Multi-finger Hands
There is a debate about the use of parallel jaw grippers versus multi-finger hands. While parallel jaw grippers
can accomplish certain tasks, multi-fingered hands with soft, compliant properties offer greater versatility in
manipulation, mimicking the dexterity of human hands.


                                                       27
Throwing and Catching
Complex tasks like throwing and catching require precise coordination of force, position, and vision. Predictive
control is essential for handling the fast dynamics of these actions.

4.16    Non-prehensile Movements
Many human actions involve non-prehensile movements, meaning they do not involve grasping objects.
Examples include:

   • Pushing/Sliding: These tasks require generalization beyond tabletop manipulation, such as interacting
     with objects on the floor.

   • Full-body and Bimanual Manipulation: Some tasks require the use of both hands or even the
     entire body to manipulate objects effectively.

   Non-prehensile manipulation is as important as prehensile (grasping-based) tasks, and both need to be
addressed for a robot to fully replicate human hand dexterity.




                                                      28

