===== Lecture 5A | pages 56-62 =====

9     Lecture5A
CS294-277 Fall 2024                                                                       Lecturer: Jitendra Malik
October 7, 2024                                                                   Scribe: Kush Hari and Justin Yu

                      Robot Dynamics, Control, and Motion Planning
                                                       Abstract
         This lecture covers key classical robotics approaches including kinematics, dynamics, control, and
      motion planning, including forward and inverse kinematics/dynamics, control system design (PID,
      feedforward, feedback), and sampling-based motion planning methods like Probabilistic Roadmaps
      (PRMs).


9.1    Robot Dynamics
9.2    Forward Kinematics
Forward kinematics is the process of calculating the position and orientation of the robot’s end-effector, given
the geometry of each link and the joint angles. Mathematically, this is done by multiplying the exponential
map of each screw (which represents a joint movement) to obtain the final configuration of the end-effector.

                                             T = eξ1 θ1 eξ2 θ2 · · · eξn θn T0
where T0 is the initial configuration, ξi represents the screw axis of each joint, and θi the joint angle. This is
also known as the **product of exponentials formula**.

9.3    URDF (Unified Robot Description Format)
URDF is an XML format used to describe a robot’s kinematics, link inertial properties, and geometry in a
tree-structured manner. For each joint and link in the robot model:

    • Joint element: Describes the kinematics of the robot (i.e., the type of joint, its axis of rotation, and
      the limits).

    • Link element: Describes inertial properties such as mass and inertia matrix.

An example of URDF syntax for a revolute joint is shown below:

<joint name="joint1" type="revolute">
  <parent link="link1"/>
  <child link="link2"/>
  <origin rpy="0 1.5708 0" xyz="0 0.5 0"/>
  <axis xyz="0 1 0"/>
  <limit lower="-3.0" upper="3.0"/>
</joint>

9.4    Forward and Inverse Dynamics
Forward dynamics is the process of determining the acceleration of each link, given the torques τ applied
at the joints:
                                           q̈ = f (τ, q, q̇)
Here, q̈ is the joint acceleration, q is the joint position, and q̇ is the joint velocity.



                                                            56
Inverse dynamics solves the opposite problem, determining the torques required to achieve a desired
movement (joint accelerations):
                                   τ = M (q)q̈ + C(q, q̇)q̇ + g(q)
Where M (q) is the mass matrix, C(q, q̇) represents Coriolis and centrifugal forces, and g(q) is the gravitational
term.
Solution Methods: There are two common methods to solve dynamics:
   • Lagrangian dynamics: Based on energy principles, this method derives equations of motion by
     minimizing the system’s action, providing an elegant way to model the dynamics especially when under
     constraints.
   • Newton-Euler dynamics: Based on rigid body force equations (f = ma). This is an efficient recursive
     method for computing inverse dynamics, breaking down the problem into individual link forces and
     torques.

9.5     Control
9.6     Cruise Control Example




Consider a car with cruise control enabled. - The control objective is to maintain a constant speed despite
changes in road conditions.

9.6.1   Open Loop Controller (Feedforward)
In this case, we press the accelerator based on how much speed we want, assuming a perfect environment.


                                              y = 10(u − 0.5w)
                                              y = 10(0.1r − 0.5w)
                                              y = r − 5w


                                                       57
Here, r is the reference input, and w represents environmental disturbances (e.g., road slope for a car’s cruise
control). If one degree of change in the throttle causes a speed change of 5 mph, but the road slope is not
accounted for, our speed may vary unexpectedly.

9.6.2   Closed Loop Controller (Feedback)




                                                      58
                                           u = 10(r − y)
                                           y = 10(u − 0.5w)
                                           y = 10(10r − 10y − 0.5w)
                                           y = 0.99r − 0.05w

Here, the system continuously measures the actual speed and adjusts the throttle to minimize the error
between the desired and actual speeds. This type of controller does not require detailed knowledge of the
environment but adjusts based on the observed error.

9.7    PID Controller
The Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) control law is one of the most widely used control algorithms
in robotics and automation due to its simplicity and effectiveness. It helps in tracking and error minimization
by adjusting the control input based on the error between the desired and actual output. The control law is
defined as:                                           Z t
                                                                        de(t)
                                 u(t) = Kp e(t) + Ki      e(τ )dτ + Kd
                                                        0                 dt
Where: - Kp is the proportional gain, which produces an output proportional to the current error. It corrects
the magnitude of the error but cannot eliminate steady-state error alone. - Ki is the integral gain, which
integrates the error over time. This helps in eliminating steady-state errors by considering the accumulated
past errors. - Kd is the derivative gain, which predicts future errors based on the rate of change of the error.
It helps in improving the stability and responsiveness of the system by damping oscillations.
The PID controller adjusts the control input in real-time to bring the system closer to the desired output,
balancing speed, stability, and accuracy. Tuning the gains allows fine control of performance parameters like
overshoot, settling time, and steady-state error.

9.8    Movement Control
Movement control is concerned with ensuring that a robot’s end-effector follows a desired trajectory in
space, typically expressed as a sequence of positions and orientations. For example, if we are writing on a
whiteboard with a marker, the tip of the marker must follow a specific path (trajectory) to form letters or
shapes accurately.
Movement control can be achieved using different control strategies such as position control (ensuring the
end-effector reaches specific points) or velocity control (controlling the rate of motion along the path). The
desired trajectory is often specified in task space, where Cartesian coordinates define the end-effector’s
position and orientation relative to a fixed reference frame. In some cases, the trajectory is specified in joint
space, which defines the angles of the robot’s joints at each point in time.
Challenges in movement control include: - Accuracy: Ensuring the end-effector follows the desired path
closely. - Smoothness: Achieving smooth motion, often through time scaling functions like S-curves to avoid
abrupt changes in velocity or acceleration. - Real-time adjustments: Modifying the trajectory in response
to dynamic changes in the environment, obstacles, or forces.

9.9    Force Control
Force control ensures that a robot exerts a specific force when interacting with its environment. Unlike
movement control, where the objective is to reach a specific position or trajectory, force control is about
regulating the force applied by the robot, especially when performing tasks that require physical interaction,
such as: - Writing on a whiteboard (applying a consistent force to maintain contact with the surface), -


                                                       59
Assembling parts (where excessive force may damage components), - Grasping objects (ensuring a firm but
not damaging grip).
Force control is often necessary when the robot interacts with objects that may deform, move, or exert
counterforces. There are two main approaches to force control: - Direct force control: Involves measuring
the force exerted by the robot and adjusting the control input to maintain the desired force. - Impedance
control: Adjusts the robot’s response (position and velocity) based on the forces it experiences, offering a
more flexible and adaptive approach that can accommodate varying environmental conditions.

9.10     Hybrid Control
In many tasks, robots must simultaneously control both position and force. This combination is known as
hybrid control. For example, when a robot writes on a whiteboard, it must: - Follow a specific trajectory
(movement control) to ensure the writing is legible. - Apply a certain amount of force (force control) to
ensure that the marker makes proper contact with the surface.
Hybrid control systems manage both movement and force using a combination of movement and force sensors.
The robot can prioritize one type of control based on the task phase or environmental conditions. For instance:
- During free movement (where contact with objects is minimal), the robot prioritizes movement control. -
During contact tasks (like writing or assembly), force control becomes crucial.
Hybrid control is challenging because it requires switching between control modes based on real-time sensory
feedback and maintaining stability in both movement and force.

9.11     Impedance Control
Impedance control focuses on regulating the mechanical impedance of the robot, which defines how it
reacts to external forces. Impedance refers to the relationship between applied force and resulting motion,
and it encompasses: - Stiffness: How much the robot resists displacement when force is applied (e.g., a stiff
robot resists motion). - Damping: How much the robot resists changes in velocity (e.g., damped systems
prevent oscillations). - Inertia: How the robot resists changes in acceleration.
In impedance control, the robot is designed to respond to external forces in a compliant manner, rather
than trying to maintain a rigid control over its movement. This is useful for tasks where the environment is
uncertain or variable. For example, if the robot is polishing a surface, impedance control allows the robot to
adjust its movements based on the shape and resistance of the surface, ensuring smooth operation without
damaging the object.

9.12     Motion Planning
Motion planning involves generating a feasible trajectory for a robot to move from an initial to a desired
configuration while avoiding obstacles. The planning process typically occurs in the robot’s configuration
space (C-space), which represents all possible positions and orientations of the robot. The goal is to compute
a path from the start to the goal in this space, avoiding any regions representing obstacles.
Motion planning can be classified into: - Discrete methods: These methods discretize the configuration
space and search for a valid path, but may suffer from computational complexity as the number of dimensions
increases. - Sampling-based methods: These include algorithms like the Probabilistic Roadmap (PRM)
and Rapidly-exploring Random Trees (RRT), which avoid exhaustive search by sampling points in the
configuration space and connecting them with feasible paths.

9.13     C-Space
Configuration Space (C-Space) represents the set of all possible configurations of a robot, including both
positions and orientations. For a robot with n degrees of freedom (DoF), the C-space is an n-dimensional


                                                      60
space, where each point corresponds to a specific configuration of the robot.
The C-space can be divided into: - Free space (Cfree ): The set of configurations where the robot does not
collide with any obstacles. - Obstacle space (Cobs ): The set of configurations where the robot collides with
obstacles.
By planning a path in Cfree , we can ensure that the robot avoids obstacles while moving towards its goal. In
higher dimensions, sampling-based methods like PRM and RRT are commonly used due to the computational
complexity of searching the entire C-space.




9.14     Probabilistic Roadmaps (PRM)
With C-Space setup, we can plot the start and goal and solve motion planning by connecting the two without
intersecting any obstacles. One such solution algorithm is Probabilistic Roadmaps (PRM).

Algorithm 1 PRM roadmap construction algorithm (undirected graph)
 0: for i = 1, . . . , N do
 0:   qi ← sample from Cf ree
 0:   add qi to R
 0: end for
 0: for i = 1, . . . , N do
 0:   N (qi ) ← k closest neighbors of qi
 0:   for each q ∈ N (qi ) do
 0:      if there is a collision-free local path from q to qi and there is not already an edge from q to qi then
 0:         add an edge from q to qi to the roadmap R
 0:      end if
 0:   end for
 0: end for
 0: return R =0




9.15     Trajectory Planning
Once a path is planned, it is important to generate a time-based trajectory, i.e., specifying the configuration
of the robot as a function of time. Time scaling is used to smoothly map time to the path parameter.



                                                      61
9.16    Time Scaling




In trajectory planning, once a path is found, it must be converted into a time-parameterized trajectory. Time
scaling ensures smooth transitions between motion segments. A common time scaling function is the S-curve,
which gradually increases and decreases the robot’s velocity to ensure smoothness.
This time-scaling function ensures that the acceleration and deceleration are smooth, reducing the likelihood
of jerky motions.




                                                     62

