===== Lecture 7A | pages 78-84 =====

13      Lecture7A
CS294-277 Fall 2024                                                                    Lecturer: Jitendra Malik
October 21, 2024                                                             Scribe: Katherine How, Tomson Qu

                                   Lecture 7A: Behaviour Cloning
                                                     Abstract
          This lecture covers an introduction to various approaches of behaviour cloning, a method of teaching
       robots new tasks through demonstrations.


13.1      Introduction
Behaviour cloning, or robot learning from demonstration (LfD) is summarized in the quote below from the
abstract of Recent Advances in Robot Learning from Demonstration (Ravichandar et al. (2020)):

"In the context of robotics and automation, learning from demonstration (LfD) is the paradigm in which
robots acquire new skills by learning to imitate an expert. The choice of LfD over other robot learning methods
is compelling when ideal behavior can be neither easily scripted (as is done in traditional robot programming)
nor easily defined as an optimization problem, but can be demonstrated."

13.2      Teaching Approaches
13.3      Kinesthetic Teaching
Kinesthetic teaching involves physically moving the robot through the desired task and logging the movements
of each joint. The trajectory of each joint can then be stored and replayed or used as training data. An
example of this can be painting a task where the robot holding a paintbrush is moved in the desired painting
motion and logging the movement.




                                    Figure 39: Kinesthetic Teaching Example



13.4      Teleoperation
Teleoperation is similar to kinesthetic teaching but instead of physically moving the robot it is moved via a
controller. The same trajectories of each joint angle can be stored and replayed for later use. This method is
ideal for when the robot is large or the task is dangerous. Because of this safety benefit, this approach is
often used in industrial and manufacturing settings.




                                                         78
                                      Figure 40: Teleoperation Example


13.5     Passive Observation
Passive observation ("imitation learning") involves a robot learning a task solely by observing demonstrations
of it. As it sees more successful and unsuccessful observations, the robot’s model of the task improves. This
approach is similar to how young children learn things by simply observing their parents. If successful,
imitation learning can theoretically make use of any image or video demonstrations of a task as training data.




                                   Figure 41: Passive Observation Example



13.6     Diffusion Policies
13.7     Overview
Diffusion policies are a relatively new approach in robotics to teaching new tasks to robots. Essentially, this
approach is able to efficiently take in a set of robot trajectories and sensor inputs and use supervised learning
to train a robot to do a task. Due to their design, they are inherently robust against perturbations and
occlusions making them reliable in a real world setting when testing on hardware. Action diffusion policies
take in images as an input and output a trajectory.




                                                       79
                          Figure 42: Image Diffusion vs Action Diffusion Examples


13.8     Diffusion in Robotics
This paper Chi et al. (2024a) was the first to apply diffusion policies to robotics by using them to generate
robot trajectories to accomplish tasks. Their approach represented the robot’s visuomotor policy as a
conditional denoising diffusion process on the robot’s action space. This new approach found an improvement
of 46.9% when compared to existing optimal methods tested across 12 tasks.




                            Figure 43: Comparison of Recent Learning Methods

Diffusion policies for action generation begin with Gaussian noise and a neural network is then trained to
denoise the potential actions by predicting the gradient of the actions conditioned on the inputs. This policy
is then looped to create a reactive policy that can adapt to stochastic environments and disturbances.
Rather than simply outputting an action, the diffusion policy infers an action score gradient that is conditioned
on visual data over K denoising iterations. This provides several key benefits:

   • Expressing Multimodal Action Distributions: It can output arbitrary normalizable distributions that
     represent multi modal action distributions. This means in scenarios with multiple optimal paths, it is
     able to select from the two rather than average them together.




                                       Figure 44: Action Multimodality


   • High-Dimensional Outputs: It can also scale well to high-dimensional outputs, as proven in the many
     applications of diffusion policies for image generation. This means that the policy is able to infer a


                                                       80
       sequence of actions rather than a discrete action for the next time step with no consideration of the
       future.




                                     Figure 45: Action Space Scalability


   • Stable Training: Another feature of diffusion policies is stable training. While energy-based policies
     require negative sampling which can cause training instability, diffusion policies learn the gradient of
     the energy function to maintain stability while training.




                                        Figure 46: Training Stability



13.9     Diffusion in Image Generation
Diffusion policies are most commonly used for image generation. Using a dataset of images, a neural network
can be trained to learn a probability density function for denoising and generating sample images. It is also
possible to train the neural network to do conditional generation. For example, through a text prompt of the
desired image, the generative models can create an image conditioned on the prompt




                                                     81
                                      Figure 47: Deep Generative Learning


13.10     Statistics behind Diffusion
Diffusion models consist of two processes, namely the forward diffusion process and the reverse denoising
process. 48.




                                                Figure 48: Diffusion model



13.10.1    Forward diffusion process
In this process, the model gradually adds noise of normal distribution to input.
The formal definition of the forward process is a Markov chain with each step defined in the equation below:
                                                                                           T
                                                                                           Y
                                                                                                                (28)
                                          p
                 q(xt |xt−1 ) = N (xt ;       1 − βt xt−1 , βt I)   ⇒     q(x1:T |x0 ) =         q(xt |xt−1 )
                                                                                           t=1

In this equation28, each xt represents a state of the image and xt−1 represents the state before. Bt ∈ (0, 1)
is a scaling factor indicating the magnitude of the variance of the noise change at each step. The RHS
formula is in form of a Gaussian distribution N (x; µ, Σ) with x with mean of µ and covariance Σ. Thus, the
conditional probability distribution of xt given xt−1 is defined as a Gaussian distribution of xt with a mean
   √
of 1 − βt xt−1 and a covariance of βt I. The joint probability distribution of x1 , x2 , ..., xt given x0 on the
RHS of the arrow can be derived from the LHS, which can be expressed as a product of the conditional
probabilities at each step. Figure 49 shows the data distribution during the process of a forward diffusion
process.
We may use the linearity property of the Gaussian distribution to directly obtain xt from x0 as shown in the
equation below:
                      t
                      Y                                           √
              ᾱt =       (1 − βs )   ⇒       q(xt |x0 ) = N (xt ; ᾱt x0 , (1 − ᾱt )I)   (Diffusion Kernel)   (29)
                      s=1



                                                               82
                                     Figure 49: Diffused Data Distributions


In this equation 29, the conditional probability distribution of xt given x0 is expressed as a Normal distribution
                          √
of xt with the mean as ᾱt x0 and covariance as (1 − ᾱt )I, with ᾱ expressed as the product of the scaling
factor at each step.
In practice, the value of Bt is designed such that ᾱT → 0 and q(xT |x0 ) ≈ N (xT ; 0, I), which means the
starting point of the reverse diffusion is approximately a standard normal distribution.

13.10.2    Reverse denoising process
In this process, the model learns to generate data by denoising. In this direction, the goal is to train a
neural network that can do the reverse process. The statistics of the reverse direction can be captured in the
equation below.
                                   pθ (xt−1 |xt ) = N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt , t), σt2 I)                         (30)
For training, we can form variational upper bound that is commonly used for training variational autoencoders
                                                                                       
                                                                            pθ (x0:T )
                                                                                                         (31)
                                             
                        Eq(x0 ) − log pθ (x0 ) ≤ Eq(x0 )q(x1:T |x0 ) − log                =: L
                                                                           q(x1:T |x0 )
In this equation, the LHS equation refers to the estimated negative log-likelihood of the data, where pθ (x0 )
represents the probability of generating the x0 . It is upper bounded by the RHS equation, where the term
        pθ (x0:T )
− log q(x  1:T |x0 )
                     stands for the negative log ratio between the joint distribution we can derive for the reverse
                                        QT
diffusion process pθ (x0:T ) = p(xT ) t=1 pθ (xt−1 |xt ) and the joint distribution we have derived for the forward
diffusion process as referred in 28. The training goal is to optimize this variational bound on negative log
likelihood.
More rigorous analysis on Learning Denoising Model and Variational upper bound can be found in Sohl-
Dickstein et al. (2015) and Ho et al. (2020) which shows that:
                                                                                                              
                                                  X
              L = Eq DKL (q(xT |x0 )∥p(xT )) +       DKL (q(xt−1 |xt , x0 )∥pθ (xt−1 |xt )) − log pθ (x0 |x1 ) (32)
                                                  t>1

where q(xt−1 |xt , x0 ) is the tractable posterior distribution:

                                    q(xt−1 |xt , x0 ) = N (xt−1 ; µ̃t (xt , x0 ), β̃t I),                       (33)




                                                             83
where                                       √                   √
                                                ᾱt−1 βt            1 − βt (1 − ᾱt−1 )
                             µ̃t (xt , x0 ) :=           x0 +                           xt              (34)
                                               1 − ᾱt                  1 − ᾱt
                                                         1 − ᾱt−1
                                                β̃t :=             βt .                                 (35)
                                                          1 − ᾱt
From an algorithmic view, the algorithm for training and sampling can be referred in the algorithms50 below:




                                  Figure 50: Diffused Data Distributions

In training stage, the network is trying to optimize the squared distance between ϵ and ϵθ which presents
a function approximator aimed to predict ϵ from xt . The sampling algorithm is to sample inputs from a
gaussian distribution, running it through sequences of denoising steps and land up to different images.

13.10.3   Content-Detail Tradeoff
In the denosing process, the low-frequency contents are produced first, then the higher-frequency contents
gradually produce. Thus, it suggests that the weighting of the training objective for different timesteps is
important.




                                     Figure 51: Diffusion Model Design



13.11     Diffusion Model Design
In terms of the model selection for the reverse diffusion policy, different architectures such as U-Net
architectures with ResNet blocks and self-attention layers can be used shown in Figure 51. Recently,
transformers has become a more popular choice.




                                                          84

