===== Lecture 1A | pages 8-13 =====

1     Lecture1A
CS294-277 Fall 2024                                                                 Lecturer: Jitendra Malik
09/09/2024                                                                 Scribe: Hongsuk Choi, Ethan Qiu

                                     Lecture 1A: Introduction

1.1    What is biological intelligence?
It is not about ChatGPT. Those things happened in the last 5 minutes of mankind history.
- Perspective A:
    Locomotion + perception = intelligence
- Perspective B:
    Locomotion + navigation + manipulation = intelligence
Some side notes:
    - What is "Perception"?: vision, hearing, and so on
    - What is "Hominid evolution"?: Bipedalism, Opposable thumb, Tool use, and etc...




                       Figure 1: Why do we care about this "Biological Intelligence"?

    - Why do we care about this "Biological Intelligence"?:
    – Self-driving car vs. 16 years old kid learning how to drive in less than 20 hours
    – A twelve year old can do all these kitchen tasks, today no robot can
    – Moravec’s paradox: hard problems are easy, easy problems are hard

1.2    Pattern Recognition vs Control Theory
1.3    What do we care about in Vision?
Generalization over aspects like pose, lighting, occlusion, in-class variation is key.

1.4    What do we care about in Control?
Robustness to disturbances and Adaptation to varying physical conditions.




                                                      8
Figure 2: Vision enables intentional foot motion, and allows the robot to adapt ahead of time. Consequently,
there have been several attempts to include vision in the locomotion loop.




               Figure 3: Blind robot walking on unstable and constantly deforming round.


1.5    How do robots learn?
What can we learn from babies? 1. Be multi-modal; vision and tactile sensing are complementary
    2. Be incremental, learning should not start from a blank state
    3. Be physical, interact with the real world
    4. Explore
    5. Social, learn from others
    6. Language
Sim-to-Real still works!
    - biped locomotion (Ilija Radosavovic’s works Radosavovic et al. (2023))
    - (bi) in-hand manipulation
Three ways to acquire skills
    1. Learning by trial and error (reinforcement learning)
    2. Learning by behavior cloning (from teleoperation)
    3. Learning by visual imitation
Examples
    2 -> recently dominating; TRI, mobile ALOHA Fu et al. (2024)
    3 -> SFV: Reinforcement Learning of Physical Skills from Videos Peng et al. (2018b), Iliya’s work (Hu-
manoid Locomotion as Next Token Prediction Radosavovic et al. (2024) / efficient training than reinforcement
learning ), Future of 3: learning robot dexterous manipulation from videos
Lessons
    1. We need big data
    2. How? Three ways
    - Simulation - not exactly same as the real physical world (e.g., need to model contact)
    - Teleoperation
    - Visual imitation; not as accurate as teleoperation.
    - 3 by 3 matrix
    The first axis: Locomotion, navigation, manipulation
    The second axis: RL in simulation, Behavioral Cloning with Teleop, Visual Imitation




                                                     9
Figure 4: Real-World Humanoid Locomotion with Reinforcement Learning, Science Robotics 2024 Radosavovic
et al. (2023).


1.6    Training in Simulation (RL)
1.7    Real-World Humanoid Locomotion with Reinforcement Learning
Using the history of proprioceptive observations and actions as input, the model predicts the next action. With
a powerful transformer model, the action prediction achieves "In-Context" adaptation and zero-shot transfer
to the real world. The model is only trained on simulation, through large-scale model-free reinforcement
learning on an ensemble of randomized environments.

1.8    RotateIt: General In-Hand Object Rotation with Vision and Touch
Multi-sensory inputs proved to be essential in the training of a policy that controls robotic fingers that can
manipulate objects. Intuitively, when humans observe a far-away object, it is un-occluded by the hands.
However, when it is in the hand, it is occluded, but we can then use the feeling of touch to aid in this
perception. By using simulation that combines depth image and tactile sensors, the policy was able to
incorpate the fused inputs and generalize to previously unseen objects. This is an improvement over classic
control methods, since solving for the massive distribution of unseen objects and complex contacts could be
intractable. Qi et al. (2023)

1.9    Twisting Lids Off with Two Hands
Using a similar sim-to-real transfer pipeline, a policy learned to control both allegro hands to manipulate
and unscrew the lid of bottles. This control problem has been thought to be very difficult due to the high
variability for how the objects can interact with the hand. However, the simulated environment provided
enough information of the policy to train on and it could generalize to regular household objects, many of
which were outside its training distribution.




                                                      10
                        Figure 5: In-context adaptation Radosavovic et al. (2023).




                                   Figure 6: RotateItQi et al. (2023) .


1.10    Learning from Example (Tele-OP + BC)
1.11    Toyota Research Institute
TRI’s research used human demos to train robots to perform tasks that were similarly difficult for control.
For tasks such as flipping a pancake, the physics of the soft body may be difficult to simulate. Thus human
demonstrations provide useful training data. Haptic-teleop gives human demonstrators the feedback of
touch when remotely operating the robots, and they observed that operators could provide much better
demonstrations and trajectories for robots to learn from.

1.12    Mobile Aloha
This project mounts two arms onto a robot base to learn bimanual manipulation policies. This also uses
human teleoperators’ demonstrations to train the robot model. Results suggest that the model can generalize
tasks beyond what it has seen (pushing in an extra chair). Fu et al. (2024)




                                                    11
                           Figure 7: Bi-manual manipulation Lin et al. (2024a).




                                Figure 8: Robot Loading Dishwasher, TRI.


1.13    Discussion
This method seems to be easier to work compared to RL. However, we need a lot of demonstrations (data) to
get reasonable performance. We are currently unsure about robustness to perturbations of the environment.
It is also unclear exactly how much data is needed for policies to generalize to tasks that are different from
the ones it was trained on.

1.14    Learning by Visual Imitation
Humans do not learn by behavior cloning. We watch someone else do a task, and we learn it from them.
We can learn to act from 3D reconstructions and keep the robot in a physics simulator. It is similar to
training RL but we use a dense signal for each frame (is the agent close to the teacher "human"). We can use
YouTube video in simulation, using videos of human walking to train robots.




                                                     12
                                         Figure 9: Peng et al. (2018b)


1.15     Learning to act from 4D reconstructions
In this paper, the agent is trained to perform a back-flip. While this is usually difficult in RL since the agent
needs to "discover" complex techniques, using human poses extracted from a tutorial gives signal for the
robot to mimic. This yields much better results compared to random exploration.

1.16     Imitation Learning for Robot Manipulation
Similarly, we can extract human hand motion from YouTube videos and train manipulation policies on them.
Existing work have focused on the extraction of hand poses from these videos. Wu et al. (2024)




                                                       13

