===== Lecture 6A | pages 69-73 =====

11      Lecture6A
CS294-277 Fall 2024                                                                            Lecturer: Haozhi Qi
October 14, 2024                                                              Scribe: Yasin Sonmez, Dylan Goetting
                                Lecture 6A: Reinforcement Learning
                                                       Abstract
           Reinforcement Learning provides a framework for agents to interact with an environment, and optimize
       for some reward function. This can be applied to robotic task learning, but doing it in the real world is
       challenging. Simulators have been developed, and perform complex physics calculations to enable easier
       training of robotic agents.


11.1      Introduction
This lecture gives a detailed overview of the Reinforcement Learning (RL) framework, the primary taxonomy
of algorithms, and details of the REINFORCE, Actor-Critic and PPO algoriths. Robotics is a natural
application or RL, but applying it in the real-world has many drawbacks such as efficiency, safety and reward
definition. To address this simulators are used to train policies, and then these policies can be deployed in
the real world (sim-to-real). Under the hood, simulators involve the looping of (i): forward dynamics, (ii):
numerical time integration, (iii): collision detection.

11.2      Reinfrocement Learning Review
11.3      Markov Decision Process
A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is a tuple (S, A, R, T , γ) where S is state space, A is action space,
R : S × A → R is the reward function, T : S × A × S → R+ is the transition function and 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1 is the
discount factor. The goal of reinforcement learning is to find a policy π ∈ Π, π : S × A → R+ , written as
π(a|s), that maximizes the expected sum of the reward:
                                                     XT
                                        ∗
                                       π = arg max E[   γ t Rt (st , at , st+1 )|π]
                                                 π
                                                         t=0

Then we can define:
                                  PT
   • Q function Qπ (st , at ) =     t‘=t Eπθ [r(st‘ , at‘ |st , at ) total reward from taking at in st

   • Value function V π (st ) = Eat ∼πθ (at |st ) [Qπ (st , at )]: The expected return from a state s under a policy π

   • Advantage function Aπ (st , at ) = Qπ (st , at ) − V π (st ) how much better at is from expected return under
     a policy π
The reinforcement learning framework can be seen in fig. 36.




Figure 36: RL framework. The agent interacts with the environment by observing the state and the reward
and taking an action.


                                                           69
11.4     Reinforcement Learning Taxonomy
Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms can be categorized based on several criteria as outlined below.
Model-based vs. model-free Model-based methods learn or use the transition dynamics model and utilize
this model for generating a policy whereas model-free methods don’t use any model of the transition dynamics.
Generally, model-based methods are more sample efficient because they can exploit the environment’s model
during training.
Value-based vs. policy based Policy-based methods rely solely on a policy network that determines
actions based on the given state without computing value functions. On the other hand, value-based methods
require the computation of value functions and derive policies from these values. Actor-critic algorithms
combine both approaches, utilizing a value function and a policy network.
On-policy vs. off-policy On-policy algorithms update their networks using data generated by the current
policy, whereas off-policy methods can learn from transitions that originate from different policies.

11.5     Reinforcement Learning Algorithms Examples
Here we will focus on the development of model-free, actor-critic, on-policy algorithms.

11.5.1    REINFORCE
Consider the Atari game of Pong, the agent can move up and down and the observation is the pixels of the
game. We want to learn a mapping from the pixels to up or down action. This is different than supervised
learning because there are no labels (no ground-truth actions). But instead of relying on this ground truth
data we can sample trajectories and label them with win or lose. Then, we can evaluate the objective as
follows:                                                             X
                            θ∗ = arg max J(θ) = arg max Eτ ∼pθ (τ ) [  r(st , at )]
                                             θ                    θ                      t
                                                        X                    1 XX
                                 J(θ) = Eτ ∼pθ (τ ) [       r(st , at )] ≈                   r(si,t , ai,t )
                                                        t
                                                                             N   i   t

                            1 XX                             X                    1 X
              ∇θ J(θ) ≈         (   ∇θ log πθ (ai,t |si,t ))(   r(si,t , ai,t ) =     ∇θ log πθ (τi )r(τi )
                            N i   t                           t
                                                                                  N i
Therefore the gradient of the objective looks similar to the maximum likelihood of supervised learning.
Intuitively trajectories with good outcomes are made more likely and bad outcomes less likely during training
which formalizes the notion of "trial and error". Notice that REINFORCE only uses a policy network and
updates its parameters by policy gradients. However, the gradient estimation formula above simply leads to
high variance in our estimation which results in unstable training. Next, we will look into how we can use
value functions by using a critic network to reduce the variance.

11.5.2    Actor-Critic
The Actor-Critic algorithm addresses the high variance problem in policy gradient methods, such as REIN-
FORCE, by introducing a value function estimator, or "critic," in addition to the policy function, or "actor."
This combination helps to reduce the variance of the gradient estimates, leading to more stable and efficient
training. Instead of using the direct reward sums we fit a value function to these values. Here is the outline
of the batch actor-critic algorithm:

  1. sample si , ai from πθ (a|s)

  2. fit V̂ϕπ (s) to sampled reward sums

  3. evaluate Âπ (si , ai ) = r(si , ai ) + γ V̂ϕπ (s‘) − V̂ϕπ (s)


                                                                  70
   4. ∇θ J(θ) ≈                               π
                  P
                    i ∇θ log πθ (ai |si )Â       (si , ai )
   5. θ ← θ + α∇θ J(θ)

11.5.3    Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)
One problem with the above formulation is that the training RL policies are unstable and a phenomenon
called “policy collapse” is often observed where the policy performance drops drastically after some time.
Algorithms like PPO address policy collapse by using a clipped surrogate objective. This clipping mechanism
restricts the extent to which the policy can change during each update, ensuring more stable and incremental
improvements. By preventing large updates, PPO reduces the risk of policy collapse and maintains a better
balance between exploration and exploitation. PPO utilizes the following modified update formula to clip the
gradients:
                                     θk+1 = arg max Es,a∼πθk L(s, a, θk ), θ
                                                               θ
where L(s, a, θk , θ) is given by
                                                               πθ (a|s) πθ
                             L(s, a, θk , θ) = min(                      A k (s, a), g(ϵ, Aπθk (s, a)))
                                                               πθk (a|s)
where g(ϵ, A) is given by                               
                                                        (1 + ϵ)A, if A ≥ 0
                                              g(ϵ, A) =
                                                        (1 − ϵ)A, otherwise


11.6     Applying RL to Robotics
RL begins to gain popularity in 2015 with DQN Mnih et al. (2013), first solving Atari games and then
AlphaGo Silver et al. (2016) achieving surprising success in the game Go. Naturally, people looked to robotics
as a promising application of RL, where the robot is the agent, and should be trained to perform various
tasks.

11.7     Real-World RL
Haarnoja et al. (2018) show impressive locomotion learning from real world RL, but it comes with the
following disadvantages:
   • Sample inefficient: Collecting real world trajectories takes a lot of time and resources, especially
     considering the number of samples needed to to train most RL algorithms.
   • Unsafe with robotics: Initial policies are usually random and can cause physical damage to the
     robot, the environment or humans.
   • Resetting: Human labor is required to reset each episode which makes collecting many trajectories
     difficult
   • Reward Definition: In the real world, it can be ambiguous how to define and automate the reward
     function.

11.8     Sim-to-Real
In 2016, OpenAI releases gym Brockman et al. (2016), making the training of RL algorithms much easier
and more standard. This leads to the approach of Sim-to-Real of training in simulation and then deploying
the same policy into the real world. Simulators can also be used to determine optimal hyperparameters or
algorithm choice. While this alleviates many of the problems of real-world RL, namely sample efficiency, it
introduces the problem of the sim-to-real gap.


                                                                      71
11.9    Limitations
RL is known to be very unstable. This can come out in the following ways:

   • Sudden performance drop: Unlike classification curves, average return curves can suddenly collapse
     after it appears they have converged to high performance.

   • Random seed variations: The same exact hyperparameters with different random seeds can lead to
     significantly different results.

   • Codebase variations: The same algorithm can lead to significantly different results across specific
     codebase implementations.

11.10     Usage Of Simulators
RL simulators must estimate the complex physical dynamics and interactions of robotic systems. The primary
simulation loop contains three phases and is shown below in Figure ??.




                                 Figure 37: Rigid Body Simulation Loop.

  1. Forward Dynamics: This involves computing the state variables (accelerations, forces, torques) from
     any detected collisions.

       (a) Newton:

                                                    Fext + Fc           Fext      Impulsec
                          vt+∆t = vt + a∆t = vt +             ∆t = vt +      ∆t +
                                                        m                m           m
                          xt+∆t = xt + vt+∆t ∆t

          In Newtonian dynamics, the velocity of an object is directly influenced by the forces acting on it.
          The position is then updated based on the new velocity.
       (b) Lagrange:
                                                           X        dri
                                                    Qi =       Fj
                                                           j
                                                                    dqj

                                                  d ∂L       ∂L
                                                           −     = Qi
                                                  dt ∂ q̇i   ∂qi
          As opposed to Newton, Lagrange’s equations focus on energy (kinetic and potential) rather than
          direct forces. The equations above show how generalized forces Qi are expressed in terms of physical


                                                     72
       forces Fj and the relation these forces and the Lagrangian L = T − U . By focusing on energy
       instead of forces, it is better suited for working with generalized coordinates and subsequently
       robotic systems in simulators.

2. Numerical Time Integration: After calculating the forces and torques, this step is straightforward
   and just involves integrating these forces to get the velocity and position states in the simulator

3. Collision Detection: Actually determining collisions between objects given their system states is
   actually quite challenging. This is broken up into broad phase, which simplifies object shapes and
   determines potential collisions. These are passed into the narrow phase to determine more precisely
   whether two objects will collide. The narrow phase involves complex algorithms such as the Gilbert-
   Johnson-Keerthi algorithm, or the Expanding Polytopes algorithm.




                                                73

