===== Lecture 11B | pages 114-117 =====

20      Lecture11B
CS294-277 Fall 2024                                                                         Lecturer: Jitendra Malik
November 25, 2024                                                                    Scribe: Yichen Xie, Shuqi Zhao

                   Lecture 11B: Case Studies in Dexterous Manipulation
                                                      Abstract
          This lecture gives a case study in dexterous manipulation. Most of the lecture goes through a
       paper Dalal et al. (2024) where a single generalist agent performs zero-shot long-horizon manipulation
       tasks in complex real scenes. Exploiting the modular idea of local policies, the proposed method has great
       generalization across objects and robustness to a set of tasks.


20.1      Introduction
Manipulation tasks that humans solve during their daily life are challenging for generalist robots. The
generalization is limited by the difficulty in scaling data collection where significant human efforts are required
to collect data sets of the order of 100K-1M trajectories O’Neill et al. (2023); Khazatsky et al. (2024); Ebert
et al. (2021). Instead, the simulation-to-reality (sim2real) transfer is blocked by 1) accurately simulating
contact dynamics 2) generating all possible scene and task configurations and 3) acquiring long-horizon
behaviors themselves. There already exist several promising strategies for the first block Tang et al. (2023);
Jiang et al. (2024); Akkaya et al. (2019). In the paper of ManipGen Dalal et al. (2024), the key idea to solve
2) and 3) lies in the locality of interaction. For many manipulation tasks, each skill can be simplified to two
steps: reaching a pre-contact pose near a target object (e.g. door handle in Fig. 85a) and then performing
the contact-rich interaction (e.g. turning the handle and pulling the door in Fig. 85b). In this case, the policy
in the second step only observes and acts in a local region to the target object of interest.




  (a) Stage-1: Hand reaches a pose near the handle.             (b) Stage-2: Hand turns the handle and pulls the door.

                      Figure 85: A person opening door can be composed into two stages.



20.2      Locality of Interaction
ManipGen Dalal et al. (2024) leverages a new policy class for sim2real transfer: local policies. They are
initialized close to the object of interest or interaction points, take observations just in the vicinity of the
object or interaction points, and take local actions in the local region. Overall:
                                                                                 
                                    t     t                                  2
                             πloc (aloc |Oloc ), sinit = s ||Xee − Xtarg,k || < ϵ                           (36)

The local policies are invariant to

   • Absolute pose: They only care about the relative position between the end-effector and object.

   • Skill order: People can use motion planning to take care of the chaining problem.


                                                          114
Figure 86: ManipGen Method Overview. (left) RL experts training (middle) Distill single-task RL experts
into generalist visuomotor policies via DAgger (right) Text-conditioned long-horizon manipulation.


    • Scene configuration: The policies only care about local regions around the object, which simplifies
      the data generation at large scale.

Local policies enable ManipGen to scale learning in simulation and transfer it to the real world in a modular
structure to solve a wide variety of tasks. This modular design philosophy improves the robustness to different
scenes since the entire complex scenes do not matter for local policies. The modular skills compose together
in a chain. The obstacle avoidance is achieved by other existing planning methods in the transition between
modules. Based on the core idea of local policies, the methods of ManipGen include the following three parts
(Fig. 86):

    • Using RL to acquire local behaviors at scale.

    • Distilling local experts into a visuomotor policy per skill.

    • Zero-shot Deployment of these policies in challenging environments in a hierarchical way.


20.3     Local Policy Skill Library
When tasks are simple enough, reinforcement learning (RL) is a good approach due to its robustness and
generalization, which does not rely on the diversity of human operators. As a result, the local behaviors are
acquired by RL. The observation includes low-dimensional object shape, which is represented by keypoints
(Fig. 86 top-left). The reward function is written as r = c1 ree + c2 robj + c3 ree,obj + c4 raction + c5 rsucc , where
ree , robj , rsucc specifies the behavior of the skill and ree,obj , raction constrain the motion of policy for easy
sim2real. The privileged observation and proprioceptive state information are passed into the policy which is
trained using PPO Schulman et al. (2017).
The authors include five skills in the local policy skill library (Fig. 87): pick, place, grasp handle, open, close.
The locality allows simulation environments to be extremely simple. However, the skills can generalize to
real-world complex scenarios since they only observe scenes locally invariant to global scene configuration.

20.4     Learning Generalists via Distillation
After building local policy skill library, next step is to distill single-object local policies into multi-object,
generalist visuomotor policies. Here, ManipGen leverages online imitation learning with multitask DAgger Ross
et al. (2011) for the distillation. The reason why it’s feasible is that RL policy can provide dense feedback at
any state, which can be considered as the expert policy.
Concretely, apart from the local proprioception, ManipGen mainly uses local wrist camera information
as observation. First, ManipGen uses Grounded SAM Ren et al. (2024) to obtain semantic information


                                                         115
Figure 87: Local policy skill library. There are five local policies (from left to right) including picking, placing,
handle grasping, opening and closing.


that indicates targeted objects, thus only depth images are needed. For the observation design, current
frame image is included to indicate current state. First frame depth image and first frame semantic image
are also included so that task information can be expressed. Then, ManipGen leverages a combination of
ResNet18-based structure and MLP to obtain actions. During the whole process, it’s worth noticing that
instead of doing everything end-to-end, it’s natural and efficient to realize modularization and deal with
sophisticated parts with computer vision methods, which can significantly improve the feasibility of training.

20.5     Deployment: Text Conditioned Manipulation
In aforementioned sections, ManipGen uses learning at scale to build generalists with specialized capabilities
for each skill and then combine them to massively amplify the generalization. But when deploying ManipGen
into real-world scenarios, the core challenge lies in moving from the specialist approach to a generalist
approach for long-horizon manipulation tasks. Therefore, ManipGen performs a hierarchical decomposition
to achieve the long-horizon manipulation task sequences. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 86 right, deployment
can be divided into three modules:

   • Plan through VLM: Since real-world tasks need agents to perceive the environment, VLM is used to
     provide the high-level plan based on the scene given views and text prompts. It separates the whole
     task into sub-tasks in terms of skill library, which provides sufficient information for reaching and
     manipulating.

   • Reach through neural motion planning: First, ManipGen performs pose estimation through
     computer vision approaches. Then it leverages neural motion planning to perform real-time motion
     planning to reach the goal position for the sub-tasks in an open-loop manner.

   • Manipulate through local policies: After reaching approximately initial poses, local policies generate
     manipulation actions based on local information. Reaching stage and manipulating stage are repeated
     iteratively until the ultimate goal is achieved.

Across all tasks (Tab. 2), ManipGen outperforms all methods, achieving 76% zero-shot success rate overall.
From aforementioned description, we can see that hierarchical decomposition is important to solve large-scale
robotics problems for it can efficiently train specialist policies on challenging manipulation tasks. In this case,
as opposed to end-to-end methods, ManipGen uses language to capture goals and sub-steps of plans and uses
computer vision approaches for each sub-steps before motor polices actually runs, which highly eliminates the
training effort. Also, we can see the vital role that language model plays in such problems. While language
model may not make sense in providing low-level actions, it surely can be applied into high-level planning
due to their strong reasoning ability from large-scale pretraining.




                                                        116
                        Cook           Replace        CabinetStore        DrawerStore            Tidy              Avg
 Stages                   2                4                  4                  6                 8               4.8
 OpenVLA              0% (0.1)          0 (0.0)          0% (0.0)             0 (0.0)           0 (0.0)         0% (.02)
 SayCan              80% (1.7)        10% (1.3)          70% (3.5)          20% (3.6)         20% (4.8)        40% (3.0)
 LLMTrajGen          70% (1.5)        0% (0.6)            0% (0.6)           0% (1.0)          0% (2.6)        14% (1.3)
 VoxPoser            70% (1.4)         0% (0.8)           0% (0.8)          0% (0.9)          10% (4.4)        16% (1.7)
 Ours               90% (1.9)        80% (3.7)          90% (3.9)          60% (4.7)         60% (7.2)        76% (4.3)

Table 2: Zero-shot long horizon manipulation. We report task success rate and average number of stages
completed per real world task. ManipGenoutperforms all methods on each task, achieving 76% with 4.28/4.8
stages completed on average.


20.6      Similar case in assembly: AutoMate
In this section, AutoMate2 is introduced becauses the similar strategy (reinforcement learning followed by
imitation learning) in ManipGen can be applied into such insertion tasks. It is clear that RL works better with
narrow space and known privilege information, so distilling them into a general policy is a reasonable strategy.
There are also several interesting topics mentioned in this work. For example, we can run dis-assembly
reversely to get assembly actions because dis-assembly is much easier than assembly, which is similar with the
idea of diffusion models. Also, human demonstrations can be used to initialize RL and we can use dynamic
time wrapping to align trajectories between humans and robots so that robots can mimic human motions.




  2 https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/training-sim-to-real-transferable-robotic-assembly-skills-over-diverse-geometries/




                                                            117

