Long horizon planning and
   the role of language
         Jitendra Malik

Hierarchy of human behavior
• The hierarchical structure of human behavior- movement, goals,
  actions and events e.g. Barker and Wright (1954).

The multiple spatiotemporal scales

• The finest scale can be understood as physical action, but the
  larger scales are best understood in terms of goals and
  intentionality

 ACTION = MOVEMENT + GOAL

On Mental Models
                      If the organism carries a `small-scale model’ of external
                      reality and of its own possible actions within its head, it
                      is able to try out various alternatives, conclude which is
                      the best of them, react to future situations before they
                      arise, utilize the knowledge of past events in dealing with
                      the present and the future, and in every way to react in a
                      much fuller, safer, and more competent manner to the
                      emergencies which face it (Craik, 1943,Ch. 5, p.61)

Modern Control theory (Kalman et al) uses a state space formalism to
achieve this. Cognitive science notions of schemas/frames are related.

What position does Harry play on the
Quidditch team?
   •Answer: Seeker

What does the Sorcerer's Stone do?
  •Answer: It produces the Elixir of Life
  which makes the drinker immortal, and
  can also turn any metal into pure gold.

What is the name of the Mirror which had
the Sorcerer’s Stone hidden within it?
   •Answer: The Mirror of Erised

or we could just watch the movie!

Long horizon planning
• Classic approach going back to SHAKEY (1971). One designs
  operators with precondition lists, delete lists, and add lists, and
  then planning is a series of calls to these operators with different
  arguments.
• There is a sophisticated line of work in the AI planning community
  building on these ideas. PDDL is used
• TAMP (Lozano-Perez and Kaelbling) is in that vein. The task
  planning part is in that tradition, the motion planning is specific for
  robotics problems.
• Language models have implicit knowledge of the operators we
  might use for executing on tasks such as “Make an omelette”

Julio Cortazar
           h/t Alyosha Efros
